
Rachel Smith (Bsc sports and exercise science) and Charlotte Cunningham (BA industrial design and technology) graduated from Loughborough University in July 2009. During their time at University, they were both members of students in free enterprise and after graduation they decided to set up their own company based on a business idea they had during their final year. 

Rachel and Charlotte were both members of the University's women football team. Both played at a high level and were unhappy with the limited choice of women's football boots on the market. Both bought at least one pair of boots per season and normally purchased them from the men's/boys range of leading suppliers like adidas and nike. Rachel and charlotte undertook some market research which showed that 80% of women and girls bought men/boys football boots. They discovered that for parents whose daughters played the game, price was paramount and buying specialist women's boots was not an option. Rachel also discovered in her research that men's/boys boots were often unsuitable for female feet and that inappropriate footwear can often contribute to womens sports related injuries. 

Both rachel and charlotte were determined to establish a successful business designing,  manufacturing and selling women's football boots and in their final year at University produced a business plan. The business plan won a University prize of £30,000 to help them to start their new venture. 

With £3000 in the bank, Rachel and Charlotte formed a limited company, Finesse sports and took out a bank loan of £50,000 to get their business idea started. They located their new company in a  small business unit on a Loughborough business park. Charlottes parents also gave them a loan of £10,000. The first year was spent refining and testing their football boot designs, protecting their IP (patent and design rights), constructing a website and negotiating a deal with a UK based sports manufacturer. They sold their first boots in August 2010 and they have continuted to rise growing sl
owly over the last two years. Most of their boots are sold over the internet but there is growing interest from sports shops to stock womens boots in response to the growing numbers of girls playing football particularly after the high profile of womens football during the London 2012 Olympics. 

Although sales have risen in the last two years the company is not performing as well as Rachel and Charlotte had hoped. Two years on, Rachel and Charlotte spend most of their time on company operational tasks such as invoicing, book keeping and customer activity. Little time is left for developing new products or for new sales and marketing activities. Although Rachel is spending some time visiting potential stockists she is making very little impact to the overall sales figures. 

A number of new threats have now posed to the organisation which include: 

- The business unit landlord has advised that he is putting up their rent
- Company who manufacture the boots has increased prices
- A website has emerged that sells cheap womens football boots. They are similar to their boots, but retail at half the price. 
- They have only just broke evena


# Answer
=========

## Current position of the business
The company is at the end of their birth phase and is into the survival period of the business development lifecycle. 

According to Greiners model of growth, the company is passing the creative stage into the direction stage. They have proved the business has value in the market and has potential, they now need to focus on strategy to carve out and solidify their positioning within the market. 

## SWOT analysis
- Strengths
    + The entrepreneurs themselves
    + The mix of domain knowledge in sports and design
- Weaknesses
    + Lack of strategy
- Opportunities
    + USP and niche market
- Threats
    + Lower cost competitors

## Recommendations
### Strategy
One of Storey's (2003) 3 principles of growth is strategy. Due to changes in the macro environment and the threat of cheaper competitors the company should invest more in R&D and look to appeal to a higher quality market. Levergaing the skills of the entrepreneurs, another principle of Storey's (2003) growth model through investment in research and develop in cutting edge products could help to develop a new USP and direction for the company. 

To assist in this creative innovative drive, I would suggest that the organisation seek to gain more market research into their target market as increased market research is correlated with business growth. Due to the niche nature of the business, they should look to really get in contact with their customers, seek feedback and try to provide this new high quality strategy. Invest in the long term features that the girls were originally looking for when they started out the venture. 

Another way to assist in this creative drive is to onboard some additional labour to take across some of the operational load. The entrepreneurs as they enter a growth phase should now be looking after strategic direction and spear heading the organisation, just as Zuckerberg and Branson did in the early (and continually) beginnings of their companies respectively. Investment in students is recommended by the department for innovation in their report in 2003. Grants and funding may also be available to offset these costs to make any additional onboarding as cheap as possible. 

As identified by Bridge et al (2003), growth cannot be achieved without innovations of some kind. 

### Finance

In order to become more competitive regardless, the organisation could look at relocating their base. It could be that their company might benefit more from an incubator environment, also known as a 'Porterian Cluster' where they can foster and create an innovative culture that would better suit the type of creative company (Porter, 1990). This would as a by product increase the motivation of the entrepreneurs also and assist in business performance indirectly. This move could also prove financially beneficial and could counteract issues with rising building costs on the industrial estate, however due to the online nature of the company, a relocation would not be destructive.

Another source of finance could come from government funding. The organisation could look to seek out innovation grants etc from the government. They are in a good position to do this as they are increasing the profile of Women sports, a politically loaded subject regarding equality, one of which the government is likely to be interested to be seen investing in. 


### Stuff to add:
- More real life examples
    + Some about differentiating?
    + Niche markets?
    + Entrepreneur lead organisations










