# Question

Richard White (_BA English and drama_) and sarah adams (_ba industrial design and technology_) graduated from loughborough university in july 2011. During their time at university they were both active members of the University's Enterprise SOciety and after their graduation they decided to set up their own company based on a business idea they had during their final year. 

Richard and Sarah were both members of a local drama group. Both were involved in acting, stage management and set design. Richard and Sarah noticed that many local performing arts venues had limited sets, lighting and costumes, making it difficult to put on high quality, professional productions. After undertaking some preliminary market research they gathered enough evidence to suggest that drama groups, schools. operatic societies and other performing artists would be interested in hiring costumes, sets and lighting from a company who could supply them with either a production package (e.g. an entire wardrobe, set and lighting for a specific production) or individual items. Furthermore, there seemed to be a frustration among potential customers that costume hire (mainly from fancy dress shops) was limited and expensive. 

Both Richard and Sarah were determined to establish a successful business designing, making and supplying costumes and sets to performing artists and organisatioans. In their final year at University they produced a business plan. The business plan won a University prize of £3000 to help them start up their new venture. 

With £3000 in the bank, Richard and Sarah foremed a limited company. Charnwood Theatre Hire Limited and rook out a bank loan of £30,000 to get their business idea started. They located their new company in a small business unit in Loughborough business park. Richard's parents also gave them a loan of £10,000 with which they purchased lighting equipment.

The first year was spent building up a stock of costumes and sets, protecting their intellectual property (a trade mark and design rights), and constructing a website for advertising purposes. They secured their first contract in June 2012, being commissioned to supply a small amateur dramatic society in nearby Ashby-de-la-Zouch with props and costumes for their production of 'A Christmas Carol'. Since then, the business has grown and in August 2013 they secured substantial contract with a large theatre company to supply costumes and sets for their 2014 programme. 

Although the company saw rapid growth in the first 3 years, Richard and Sarah have found running the business hard and frustrating. Sales have plateaued and no new customers have placed orders. In addition to making costumes and sets, Richard and Sarah spend most of their time on company operational tasks such as invoicing, book-keeping and customer enquiries. Little time is left for securing new customers. Even the recruitment of an apprentice dressmaker has made very little impact on overall sales figures.

A number of developments have also arisen in the last few months that pose a threat to the business. 

- The business unit landlord has advised that he is putting up their rent by £150 per month. This is a major increase that the comapny cannot really afford but Richard and Sarah are keen to stay in Loughborough
- The company who supply Charnwood Theatre Hire Limited with fabrics has been bought out by a bigger organisation and has increased its prices by 20%. 
- A local fancy dress shop has gone on-line providing costumes for hire at 20% less than Charnwood Theatre Hire Limited Sarah has found out that one small customer has already switched to using this outlet
- The arts Council has cut grand funding by 29% from 2013-2015

Come up with a new business plan and strategy. 

- Use information given in the case study
- Specify additional assumptions
- Write a report for Charnwood Theatre Hire Limited:
    -  Includes critical evaluation of their current business activities
    -  Include suggested ways to improve future business performance


The business is currently in the 'survival' phase of the business lifecycle and has proved that it is a valuable organisation and now needs to strategise to stay in the market. This is the first crisis in Greiners model of SME growth, as the company moves out of the creativity phase. To correctly analyse the business at present, the best technique available would be a SWOT analysis. The business's current position would be as such:

## SWOT
- Strengths
    - Human resources
        - Expertise of the business owners
    - Strategy
        - Niche market
        - USP of providing a full service
- Weaknesses
    - Finance
        - Costs are higher than competitors
        -  High cost of bank loands
- Opportunities
    + Market
        - Move into online market
        - Larger target area for customers
    - Finance
        -  Grow to gain economies of scale
        - Look to move their costly location to somewhere cheaper. Do they really need to be on the business park?
        - Alternative financing
    * Operations
        * Bring someone in with an operational business mind to allow the owners to focus on creative aspect of the business
- Threats
    - Cheaper competition
    - Rising costs of materials and suppliers

It is clear that the organistaion is at what is known as the 'plateu' stage. This stage is where percieved cost of growth are exceeding percieved benefits. However, this is largely the case as current production methods aren't very scalable. The company seems to also be in the first phase of the Greiner model of growth (Creativity). The organisation is moving from its initial creativity stage into its direction phase. 

The organisation has a decision to make regarding __strategy__, strategy is one of 3 ways that Storey (1994) highlights as methods of growth for SME's they can choose to move online and cut prices of production to match this sales method, or they can look to provide a more bespoke, customised solution to strengthen the companies USP. The bespoke tailored solution I think would be the better solution as it focuses on the companies biggest asset, the entrepreneurs themselves another area in Storey's (1994) framework for SME growth. The other companies are already competing on price, so the best strategy would be to up the value delivered in the product and use the entrepreneurs themselves as part of the brand. However, this will be a limitation down the line, but for now will allow the organisation to grow. This is the same methodology that companies such as Apple, Virgin or Facebook have done with their CEO's Jobs, Branson and Zuckerberg respectively. 

To assist in this new strategy I suggest __employing__ over time another member of staff to take over the operations side of the organisation. It is possible that they could employ a placement or univeristy graduate which are shown to be favourable to SME growth (Department for innovation report, 2003).This is likely to be stifling the creativity of the entrepreneurs and they should be more invovled in creative and strategic decision making moving forward. Bringing in an employee at a higher level is difficult in an SME as it is usual the spark of the entrepreneur as the reason the business exists and has been successful to this date. This new employee could look at levaraging new technologies to automate some of these tasks to try and bring down costs.

To match this strategy shift, the company could look at changing their current pricing strategy to differentiate from the competition. To stay inline with the original firms intentions, they should look to leverage some __Economies of scale__ and begin to offer bulk discounts, and different packages. Local costume shops will not be able to provide this full 'comprehensive' package, creating an attractive service/product. This look at new packages could be achieved through market research, and as Barkham (2012) highlights, 'formal market research is strongly correlated with growth'. 

Regarding __Finance__ it is important that no matter what the organisation should be looking to reduces its finances and increase its bottom line. To do so the company could look at different sources of finance than bank finance. Bank finance is one the most methods of cash flow generation available to a SME. They would be a lot better with an investor such as 

// TODO: LOOK UP ALTERNATIVE FINANCING STRATEGIES
// TODO: DISCUSS FINANCE GAP

__Marketing__ has a lot of potential for the firm. Due to the nature of the products, the company could offer reward schemes, or discounts if customers decided that having grouped offers would be more beneficial. 

# Bits to add to make this a better answer

- Student placements // TODO: find out who said this (think it was EU commission?)
- Add in more real life anecdotes to improve this answer

